CHOCOLATE-ESPRESSO DACQUOISE: Serves 10 to 12

The components in this recipe can easily be prepared in advance. Use a rimless
baking sheet or an overturned rimmed baking sheet to bake the meringue. Instant
coffee may be substituted for the espresso powder. To skin the hazelnuts,
simply place the warm toasted nuts in a clean dish towel and rub gently. We
recommend Ghirardelli Bittersweet Chocolate Baking Bar with 60% cacao for this
recipe.  

Ingredients

MERINGUE 
    3/4 cup blanched sliced almonds, toasted 
    1/2 cup hazelnuts,toasted and skinned 
    1 tablespoon cornstarch 
    1/8 teaspoon salt 
    1 cup (7 ounces) sugar 
    4 large egg whites, room temperature 
    1/4 teaspoon cream of tartar

BUTTERCREAM 
    3/4 cup whole milk 
    4 large egg yolks 
    1/3 cup (2 1/3 ounces) sugar 
    1 1/2 teaspoons cornstarch 
    1/4 teaspoon salt 
    2 tablespoons amaretto or water 
    1 1/2 tablespoons instant espresso powder 
    16 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

GANACHE 
    6 ounces bittersweet chocolate, chopped fine 
    3/4 cup heavy cream 
    2 teaspoons corn syrup 
    12 whole hazelnuts, toasted and skinned 
    1 cup blanched sliced almonds, toasted

Instructions

    1. FOR THE MERINGUE: Adjust oven rack to middle position and heat oven to
250 degrees. Using ruler and pencil, draw 13 by 10 1/2-inch rectangle on piece
of parchment paper. Grease baking sheet and place parchment on it, ink side
down.

    2. Process almonds, hazelnuts, cornstarch, and salt in food processor until
nuts are finely ground, 15 to 20 seconds. Add 1/2 cup sugar and pulse to
combine, 1 to 2 pulses.

    3. Using stand mixer fitted with whisk, whip egg whites and cream of tartar
on medium-low speed until foamy, about 1 minute. Increase speed to medium-high
and whip whites to soft, billowy mounds, about 1 minute. With mixer running at
medium-high speed, slowly add remaining 1/2 cup sugar and continue to whip
until glossy, stiff peaks form, 2 to 3 minutes. Fold nut mixture into egg
whites in 2 batches. With offset spatula, spread meringue evenly into 13 by 10
1/2-inch rectangle on parchment, using lines on parchment as guide. Using spray
bottle, evenly mist surface of meringue with water until glistening. Bake for 1
1/2 hours. Turn off oven and allow meringue to cool in oven for 1 1/2 hours.
(Do not open oven during baking and cooling.) Remove from oven and let cool to
room temperature, about 10 minutes. (Cooled meringue can be kept at room
temperature, tightly wrapped in plastic wrap, for up to 2 days.)

    4. FOR THE BUTTERCREAM: Heat milk in small saucepan over medium heat until
just simmering. Meanwhile, whisk yolks, sugar, cornstarch, and salt in bowl
until smooth. Remove milk from heat and, whisking constantly, add half of milk
to yolk mixture to temper. Whisking constantly, return tempered yolk mixture to
remaining milk in saucepan. Return saucepan to medium heat and cook, whisking
constantly, until mixture is bubbling and thickens to consistency of warm
pudding, 3 to 5 minutes. Transfer pastry cream to bowl. Cover and refrigerate
until set, at least 2 hours or up to 24 hours. Before using, warm gently to
room temperature in microwave at 50 percent power, stirring every 10 seconds.

    5. Stir together amaretto and espresso powder; set aside. Using stand mixer
fitted with paddle, beat butter at medium speed until smooth and light, 3 to 4
minutes. Add pastry cream in 3 batches, beating for 30 seconds after each
addition. Add amaretto mixture and continue to beat until light and fluffy,
about 5 minutes longer, scraping down bowl thoroughly halfway through mixing.

    6. FOR THE GANACHE: Place chocolate in heatproof bowl. Bring cream and corn
syrup to simmer in small saucepan over medium heat. Pour cream mixture over
chocolate and let stand for 1 minute. Stir mixture until smooth. Set aside to
cool until chocolate mounds slightly when dripped from spoon, about 5 minutes.

    7. Carefully invert meringue and peel off parchment. Reinvert meringue and
place on cutting board. Using serrated knife and gentle, repeated scoring
motion, trim edges of meringue to form 12 by 10-inch rectangle. Discard
trimmings. With long side of rectangle parallel to counter, use ruler to mark
both long edges of meringue at 3-inch intervals. Using serrated knife, score
surface of meringue by drawing knife toward you from mark on top edge to
corresponding mark on bottom edge. Repeat scoring until meringue is fully cut
through. Repeat until you have four 10 by 3-inch rectangles. (If any meringues
break during cutting, use them as middle layers.)

    8. Place 3 rectangles on wire rack set in rimmed baking sheet. Using offset
spatula, spread 1/4 cup ganache evenly over surface of each meringue.
Refrigerate until ganache is firm, about 15 minutes. Set aside remaining
ganache.

    9. Using offset spatula, spread top of remaining rectangle with 1/2 cup
buttercream; place on wire rack with ganache-coated meringues. Invert 1
ganache-coated meringue, place on top of buttercream, and press gently to
level. Repeat, spreading meringue with 1/2 cup buttercream and topping with
inverted ganache-coated meringue. Spread top with buttercream. Invert final
ganache-coated strip on top of cake. Use 1 hand to steady top of cake and
spread half of remaining buttercream to lightly coat sides of cake, then use
remaining buttercream to coat top of cake. Smooth until cake resembles box.
Refrigerate until buttercream is firm, about 2 hours. (Once buttercream is
firm, assembled cake may be wrapped tightly in plastic and refrigerated for up
to 2 days.)

    10. Warm remaining ganache in heatproof bowl set over barely simmering
water, stirring occasionally, until mixture is very fluid but not hot. Keeping
assembled cake on wire rack, pour ganache over top of cake. Using offset
spatula, spread ganache in thin, even layer over top of cake, letting excess
flow down sides. Spread ganache over sides in thin layer (top must be
completely covered, but some small gaps on sides are OK).

    11. Garnish top of cake with hazelnuts. Holding bottom of cake with 1 hand,
gently press almonds onto sides with other hand. Chill on wire rack, uncovered,
for at least 3 hours or up to 12 hours. Transfer to platter. Cut into slices
with sharp knife that has been dipped in hot water and wiped dry before each
slice. Serve.

Technique DIY Deluxe

Our dacquoise is not just easier than a professional-bakery version—it’s
better.

    MORE GANACHE: We spread ganache on the exterior as well as between the
layers for rich chocolate in every bite.  EASIER BUTTERCREAM: Most buttercreams
call for egg whites and a fussy hot sugar syrup. Ours skips the syrup and uses
up yolks left over from making the meringue.  LIGHTER MERINGUE: This meringue
is ready in half the time that most recipes take. It’s also lighter and easier
to slice and eat.

